A History of Kachari Kingdom is nothing but the History of Dimasa Kachari Kingdom. Kachari being one of the indigenous tribe of India's North-East, their history is quite old. In the Mahabharata and other ancient Hindu scriptures there are mention about the foothill dwellers of the Great Himalayas called ‘Kiratas’. The term Kirata stands for Mongoloid racial communities, but some historian believed that it indicates Kachari.

The earliest Kachari settlements were in the foothills of the Himalayas.From there they moved to the Brahmaputra valley with their Capital at Khamru>Kamruli or Khamruba>Kamrupa (Khamruba means start first to establish the place). Sir Edward Gait in his History of Assam,1906 is of the opinion that the Kachari were the aborigines or earliest inhabitants of the Brahmaputra valley along with the Moran, Motok, Koch and Keot(Kaibarta). After hundreds of years of rule in the Brahmaputra valley,a bulk of this race due to socio-political turmoil,were believed to have migrated south of the Brahmaputra and settled in the areas of the present Sadiya of Assam after crossing the mighty river by planning of cane bridge, probably the Brahmaputra. This section is now known as 'Dimasa' etymologically 'the children of the great river' (Di = water, ma = big, sa = children) (see Bordoloi 1988, Gait 1906).

Facing Ahom aggression, they further migrated toward south, on to the Dongsiri>Dhansiri valley and established their capital at Dimapur presently in the state of Nagaland after a short stint at Kachomari pathar about forty kilometers from Dimapur. It was here that the Dimasa Kachari undertook an arduous task of state building and flourished for several hundred years till 1536 when they shifted their capital to Maibang at the present day district of Dima Hasao District (Old name "North Cachar Hills") of Assam. Historical relics of Dimasa Kachari royaldome still exist in and around Dimapur, particularly in the Dimapur fort called Kachari Rajbari in spite of the constant ravages of human encroachment, show that the Kachari at that period had attained a state of the result of bricks making. Among the large tanks Podum Pukhuri, Bangle Pukhuri, Bamun Pukhuri, Raj Pukhuri, Jor Pukhuri and others still survive to this day. It is said in one folklore that during the fight with Ahom, The Dimasa Kachari King had dumped gold and other precious metals in some of these tanks and believed to have told his subject that long after he left, a day would come when a male Mithun would come from the hills and dig up this gold by its horn, which would weigh mound (about 240 kg) and that would be the time when Dimasa Kachari rise again and prosper.

The Dimapur reign of the seven hundred years (i.e. 835 A.D to 1854 A.D.) extended along the southern bank of the Brahmaputra, from the Dikhow river in the east to Kalang in the west and Dhansiri valley. Historian are not in the position to tell the exact date of establishment of the Dimasa Kachari capital of Dimapur. They presumed that the capital of Dimapur was established in the 10th century. Dimapur was said to be flourishing at its full heights. For, it must have taken at least seven hundred years for the King to build his state.

The glorious Rule of the Dimasa Kachari Kingdom at Dimapur capital from intime memorial from the epic age, but it began with the advent of the Ahoms in the upper Brahmaputra by the close of the fifteenth century. The expansionist behavior of the Ahom lead to constant hostilities between the two. Thus in the year 1490 the major battle was in which the Ahoms were completely routed and their Chief Chuhenpha was humiliated and forced to sue for peace. However peace did not last for long as the Ahoms intruded into the Dimasa Kachari territory and set up a fort at Morangi ( in Golaghat) and thus the battle ensued in 1526 AD and the Ahoms were again totally defeated and pushed back beyond the Dikhow river, which became the natural boundary between the two principalities for some years. Meanwhile, when the Ahoms kept on consolidating their army, the Dimasa Kachari, emboldened by previous successes, became complacent and neglected the security affairs of their country. Taking advantage of this, the Ahoms forgot their numerous humiliating defeat in the past and again broke their peace treaty with the Dimasa Kachari and set up a fort at Morangi and thus another battle ensued and the Dimasa Kachari were finally defeated due to superior number of army. A Dimasa Kachari folk tale says that the Ahom army rode on cows during this battle, which shocked the Kachari army, since killing cows would be a defilement. The Dimasa Kacharis of that period, considered cows ‘gushu’ (impure). Only later, after they embraced Brahmanical Hinduism, did they believe cows sacred. After defeating the Kacharis monarch Khunkradao Raja, the Ahoms installed Dehtsung, the kings brother, as Dimapur King on condition of allegiance to the Ahoms ruler. However, within a few years the Dimasa Kachari king revolted and refused to pay tribute to the Ahom ruler and thus another battle became inevitable and in 1536 another fierce battle was fought. The Dimasa Kachari King was defeated. The survivors of the ruling clan along with loyal subjects thereafter shifted their capital to Maibang.

From Dimapur, the royal family of Kachari in their last lag of migration moved to Khaspur of Kachar district of Assam. The Dimasa Kachari Kingdom finally annexed by the British East India company along with Assam following Yandabu Treaty.
