Dimapur-the seat of ancient (Dimasa)-Kachari Civilization

Situated on the banks of the river Dhansiri,Dimapur, often described as the ‘Brick City’ by European scholars and also by the Ahom, was the ancient capital of a ruling nation, the Dimasa Kachari, who were once a powerful and predominant race in the Entire North-East India region.There are two versions of how Dimapur got its name. Many writers are of the opinion that the name’ Dimapur’ was derived from Dimasa Kachari words Di-meaning "water," Ma-meaning big and Pur-meaning "city" or "township" in Dimasa-Kachari dialogue. While other believe that Dimapur is a corruption of Hidimbapur (Hirimbapur), meaning the city of Hidimba of Mahabharata fame whose wedlock with Pandava prince Bhima gave birth to Ghotokacha, who is believed to be the progenitor of the Kachari. Later Hidimbapur devolved to Dimbapur and then finally to Dimapur. In some Dimasa Kachari folklores Dimapur is often referred as Dimabang Halali, which implies that Dimapur was originally known by that name but was Sanskritized later by the Brahmin. In Ahom Chronicles Dimapur has been described as ‘Che-din-chi-pen’ (town-earth-burn-make) meaning ‘brick town’ or ‘Che-Dima’ meaning town of Dimasa

The seat of capital of Dimapur Kingdom was originally surrounded by bricks walls of four feet wide, sixteen feet high with outer ditch running alongside the walls of sixteen feet width and twelve feet in depth except on the southern side where the river Dhansiri served as the natural ditch. On the eastern side there was a fine solid gateway with brick masonry of pointed double arcs. The gate was secured by double heavy doors hinged in pierced upright setting of solid stone blocks. At both ends of the bannttlement there were turrets of half quadrant shape and in between the arc-way and the turrets were niche resembling ornamental windows. On both sides above the arc there were symbolic works of sun flower. There were originally inset by bright brass coating and could be seen dazzling from the great distance.

Inside the fortified city, there were seventeen artistic stone pillars. These stone monuments were decorated with carvings of foliage, flowers, familiar animals and birds but nowhere any human images of gods and goddesses were seen. These implied that the Dimasa Kachari were free of Hindu influence at that time. These monoliths are believed to be lineal monuments of the ruling kings of Dimapur. The biggest of them was seventeen feet high and twenty four feet in circumference and was said to be memorial of the greatest Dimasa Kachari ruler Makardhwaj Thaosen in whose time the traditional glory of the Dimasa Kachari Kingdom rose to its climax and during whose time the conquests were made of Manipur and Burma by Hero Dehmalu Kemprai, the greatest war lord of the Dimasa Kachari. Also during this period, heroes like Rangadao Daolaguphu (Who was given the southern part of Dimapur, Ranga Pathar or Rangapahar after his name is still remain), Dehgadao Daolaguphu and mystic heroines like Waibangma,Waringma Theremju flourished in war affairs and mysticism. Other V-shape stone monuments seventeen in numbers indicated seventeen royal clans of the ‘Kachari Aristocracy’ a term used by Dr. Francis Hamilton, a renowned scholar of the Kachari Royal Clan.
